---
id: A9
tags:
  - sfwr2c03
date: "2024-03-25"
title: Social graphs
---

<!-- <div style="text-align: right;"> -->
<!--   <span>Aaron Pham - 400232791 - phama10</span> -->
<!-- </div> -->

## Problème 1.

A regional government wants to improve their existing infrastructure between a collection of towns $T$. In specific, the government want to build a minimum number of roads such that there is a route from each town to each other town. The government has been advised by a dubious consultant that in the resulting road network, the number of users of a given road is independent of the presence of alternative routes.
The regional government wants to minimise the number of roads it has to built to ensure that one can travel from one town to the other.
Furthermore, the government wants to maximize the benefits of the road network by maximizing the number of users of the roads built. Hence, the government wants to only build roads that are expected to be used often. To help the construction plans, the government has asked the dubious consultant to estimate, for each pair of cities, the number of road users that would use the road between these two cities (if that road was built).
Now the regional government is looking for a construction plan for a minimum number of roads connecting all towns that see the highest total usage among them.

> [!question] P1.1
> Model the above problem as a graph problem: What are the nodes and edges in your graph, do the edges have weights, and what problems are you trying got answer on your graph?

- **Nodes**: Each town in the set of town $T$ is represented as a node in the graph. Denote the set of nodes as $V$
- **Edges**: Each potential road can be built between two pair of town. Denote it as $E$. Each edge weights represents the estimated number of users who would use the road should it is constructed. Denote the weight of an edge between nodes $i$ and $j$ as $w(i, j)$.

The problem can then be modelled as given a weighted undirected graph $\mathcal{G} = (V, E)$ representing towns and potential roads, find a maximum weight minimum spanning tree of $G$.

Explanation:

- We need to ensure there is a route from each town to every other town while minimising the number of roads being built, thus the minimum spanning tree of the graph.
- Among all possible MSTs, we want to find the one with the maximum total edge weight, thus maximum weight MSTs.

> [!question] P1.2
> Provide an algorithm $\text{ConstructionPlan}$ to find the minimum number of roads to build. Explain why your algorithm is correct.
