---
date: "2025-10-29"
draft: true
id: M3
modified: 2025-10-29 02:16:15 GMT-04:00
tags:
  - university
  - sfwr4hc3
title: M3
---

## Stakeholder Requirements/Needs

1. User-Centric Design:
   The Mosaic system must be crafted to cater to the specific needs of its diverse user base, including administrative staff and students. The interface should offer personalized shortcuts and features that align with the distinct requirements of each user group.

Priority: Must have — Essential to meet the varied needs of different user types.

2. Intuitive Navigation and Search Functionality:
   Navigation within the Mosaic system should be straightforward and user-friendly, with a well-organized layout that enables quick and easy access to vital features. Incorporating a robust search function will significantly enhance the user experience, allowing for rapid retrieval of information and functionalities.

Priority: Must have — Critical for user efficiency and satisfaction across devices.

3. Enhanced Integration with Planning Tools:
   The system should offer seamless integration with a variety of planning tools beyond the Microsoft ecosystem, such as Apple Calendar, Notion, and Google Calendar. This integration will facilitate effortless scheduling, task management, and workflow assimilation for users, reducing the need for manual coordination.
   Priority: should have — Critical for user productivity.

## Environmental Requirements

1. Streamlined and Adaptable Interface:
   The Mosaic website should boast a simplified yet comprehensive interface. It should incorporate modular components that not only ensure ease of use but also support user customization, without compromising the richness of features and resources available.
   Priority: must have — Critical for usability.

2. Efficient Utilization of Existing Infrastructure:
   The upgraded system is expected to be responsive and modern, but it must leverage the existing infrastructure to avoid unnecessary environmental and financial costs. The deployment should incorporate advancements in technology in a way that does not lead to excessive increases in energy consumption or the need for extensive new hardware installations.

   Priority: must have — Critical for not to incur additional costs.

## Technical Requirements

1. Device Compatibility and UI Modernization:
   The Mosaic system requires an overhaul to ensure seamless use across various devices, including laptops, tablets, and mobile phones. The interface should be redeveloped using contemporary web technologies to replace the current usage of basic HTML and jQuery, leading to a more intuitive and user-friendly experience.
   Priority: must have as users want to be able to access the system from any device

2. Enhanced Responsiveness:
   To provide a consistently smooth user experience, web components of the Mosaic system should be rendered server-side. This approach will mitigate the impact of network latency on performance, addressing issues related to system responsiveness noted by users.
   Priority: high as the experience should be as smooth as possible

3. Revamp Technology Stack:
   Mosaic's underlying technology is outdated and lacks the necessary reactivity for modern features and efficient feedback integration. The project demands an updated technology stack, equipped to handle current and future feature requirements with agility.
   Priority: should have, as it will make system easier to maintain and update

4. Improved Feature Accessibility:
   User feedback has highlighted challenges in locating and accessing key features, such as tax forms and financial documents. The redesigned system should prioritize the visibility of frequently used features, incorporating a customizable "favorites" section for quick access to preferred tools and functions. Additionally, the system should include a composable components system such that new features can be easily added/modified/update in the future.
   Priority: should have, as it will make system easier to use

These requirements aim to directly address user concerns and technical limitations identified in the current Mosaic system, paving the way for a more robust and user-centric platform.
