---
date: "2025-10-29"
draft: true
id: M4
modified: 2025-10-29 02:16:15 GMT-04:00
tags:
  - university
  - sfwr4hc3
title: M4
---

## Evaluation 1: Usability Testing or the New UI Design

To asses the usability of the testing with regards to the new UI Design layouts. Users will need to navigate through how to get to financial tabs.

### Instruments:

- Thinking out loud methods is being used.
- Users are tasked to navigate through a task to go and see their financial reports for this term.

### Tasks:

- Locate and use search bar.
- Attempt to resize the search bar output modal.
- Attempt to search and find out “Financials” from the search bar.
- Attempt to create a reports for this term.
- Use the “Export to PDF” feature to create a financial reports.

### Measurements:

- Completion rate: Whether users could complete the tasks without any asisstance (out of 5)
- Likert Questionnaire: Measure users satisfaction with questionaire based on a scale from 1 to 5

### Summary:

Participants found the updated UI design to be largely intuitive, a lot better than the current design. The Search bar largely improve
accessibility as it allows users to quickly find the feature they are looking for. The new UI design also allows users to add customize actions, (
in this case, quickly access the financial reports and export them to PDF) which greatly improve the users productivity.

### Key Insights:

- The search bar improved discoverability of features
- Users don't really care about some of the features which are pinned on the home page, thus the ability to customize the home page is crucial.

### Takeaways:

- The new UI is in a good track to improve the usability of the system.
- Popup modal for helpers on each of the features would be a good addition to the system, to increase accessibility.

## Evaluation 2: Feature relevance

To evaluate the relevance of features that are currently showed in the home screen.

### Instruments

- Thinking out loud methods is being used.
- Users are tasked to give their opinion on what features they would like on the home screen as well as the order of the features.

### Tasks

- Users are presented with a list of features that are currently on the home screen.
- Once a features is selected, then it will showed a sub-list of features that are currently in the feature.
- Provide features on the main page elements such as "Student Center", "HSR Bus Pass", etc.

### Measurements

- Relevant rate: Whether users think the feature is relevant to them (out of 5)
- Scale: Measure users satisfaction with questionaire based on a scale from 1 to 5

### Summary

- Some of the features are not relevant to the users, such as "HSR Bus Pass", and can be replaced with more relevant features such as "Financials",
  "Grades", etc.
- Would be nice if Search bar can be added to the home screen, so that users can quickly search for the feature they are looking for.

### Key Insights

- Appreciated the ability to personalize the home screen, which this is not possible in the current system.
- The ability to pin recently used features to the nav bar is a good addition to the system.

### Takeaways

- Consider removing some of the features that are not relevant to the users.
- Consider adding a search bar to the home screen.
- Consider adding the ability to pin features to the nav bar.
